---
layout: post
title: "The Story of Champ d'Asile"
---
<p align=center><a href="/texas/">↑ Table of Contents</a></p>
<p style="text-align:left;">
    <span style="float:right;">
        <a href="/texas/02-english-preface.html">English Edition Preface →</a>
    </span>
</p>
## Facsimile Edition Preface
by Wilson M. Hudson, 1969
### The Book Club of Texas
*The Story of Champ d'Asile* was the seventh, final, and possibly most beautiful selection published by The Book Club of Texas. Despite the fact that publications of the Club were limited to only three hundred copies, the books won widespread acclaim for their design and production. Of the seven selections, three (the 1931, 1932, and 1933 choices) were named among the Fifty Books of the Year—a coveted honor awarded for quality of design, printing, paper, and binding. No other book club can boast such a record of designing and producing beautiful books.

The first selection, in 1930, was *Memoir of Colonel Ellis P. Bean*, designed and printed in Texas by the Rein Press of Houston. This volume was edited by H. K. Yoakum, whose name appears, by some curious error, as W. P. Yoakum on the title page.

The Club's second selection, *Eneas Africanus* by Harry Stillwell Edwards, appeared later in 1930. Though published in New York by the Marchbanks Press, it carried the following explanation: "As Mr. Marchbanks is a printer from Texas, The Book Club feels that the book may properly be called a native product."

*Code Duello* (1931), the third selection, designed and printed by the Lakeside Press of Chicago, was chosen as one of the Fifty Books of the Year. Compiled by Virginia Aylett Quitman McNealus, it was a series of previously unpublished letters—relating to a challenge to a duel—that had passed between Senator Sargeant S. Prentiss and Governor I. M. Tucker, both of Mississippi.

Like the third, the fourth publication, *Miss Zylphia Gant* by William Faulkner (1932), was honored as one of the Fifty Books of the Year. This very fine volume, consisting of a single short story, was designed, printed, and bound in Texas by a Dallas printer, J. M. Colville & Son.

The Club's fifth selection, *From Texas to Mexico and the Court of Maximilian in 1865* by Judge Alexander Watkins Terrell, was chosen as one of the Fifty Books of the Year for 1934. Designed and printed by the Lakeside Press of Chicago, it provided as an extra attraction a previously unpublished drawing by O. Henry.

The sixth selection was not offered until 1936, the centennial anniversary of Texas's independence. J. Frank Dobie's *Tales of the Mustang* was illustrated by Jerry Bywater and printed by the Rein Company of Houston.

The seventh and last selection of The Book Club of Texas, *The Story of Champ d'Asile*, was printed in 1937 by the Rydal Press of Santa Fe, New Mexico. It is reproduced here in facsimile as part of Steck-Vaughn's Life and Adventure Series.

In 1941 Stanley Marcus, founder and president of The Book Club of Texas, conveyed the funds in the Club's treasury and its unsold books to the Texas Folklore Society. The Society's minutes for that year state that it was not possible to sell the books at the inventoried price, but that the Society hoped to realize enough to publish a book worthy of the Club's achievement. With this help the Society was enabled to begin the Range Life Series. If the Society had any of the Club's books today, it could readily dispose of them for prices many times greater than those originally listed. A collector fortunate enough to locate a copy of *The Story of Champ d'Asile* would have to pay about $100 for it; he could not expect to obtain Faulkner's *Miss Zylphia Gant* for much less than $300, and he would have to go higher for Dobie's *Tales of the Mustang*, now the rarest of the Club's publications.

Mr. Marcus, prime mover in the establishment of the Club, had the assistance of John A. Lomax in the early stages. In August of 1928 Lomax, then associated with the Republic National Bank of Dallas, wrote to E. W. Winkler, librarian at The University of Texas, for a list of the principal librarians of Texas so that he could invite them to join the prospective organization. Though Lomax signed himself "Treasurer, The Book Club of Texas," the Club was not formally organized until the next year. As Mr. Marcus states ("The Book Club of Texas," *News Notes: Bulletin of the Texas Library Association*, X [Oct. 1934], 16), the question of a book club of Texas was asked "a small group of bibliophiles" in 1929, and The Book Club of Texas came into being. It was planned to publish at least one book a year on a literary or historical subject and to encourage the graphic arts generally in Texas. The material chosen was to be indigenous and preferably unpublished, and editions were to be limited to 300 copies. A very handsome broadside, printed by the Rein Company of Houston, announced the formation of the Club, stated its purposes and mode of operation, and listed the charter members. Dallas was better represented than any other Texas city, but there were also members from Austin, Houston, Galveston, and San Antonio. H. Y. Benedict, president of The University of Texas, and R. L. Batts, chairman of the board of regents, had enrolled, and so had W. J. Battle of the classics department and Fannie Ratchford of the Wrenn Library. J. Frank Dobie was not a charter member, but he joined shortly after the appearance of the Club's first book.

In republishing a facsimile edition of *The Story of Champ d'Asile*, Steck-Vaughn Company is rendering a service to students of history and literature and to book lovers. The only materials added to the original are facsimiles of the title page of each of the two original French books on which The Story of Champ d'Asile is based, and a facsimile of the map from Louis François L'Héritier's *Le Champ-d'Asile* published by Ladvocat in Paris in 1819. The title page of the original edition of *L’Héroïne* is reproduced on page 28. The title page of the original French edition of *Le Texas* is reproduced on page 106. The map is reproduced on page 26.

Rather than correct the occasional typographical errors, none of which produces a confusion of sense, the editors thought it best to reproduce the book in its original form. On page 126, for example, the period instead of a comma after "Perrey Point" would cause no difficulty for the reader.

### The Book

The Story of Champ d'Asile brings together under a new title two books published separately in Paris, both in 1819: *Le Texas, ou notice historique sur le champ d’Asile* ... by Hartmann and Millard and *L'Héroïne du Texas* ... by G.. n F.. n. *L'Héroïne* is a fictionalized derivative of *Le Texas* with assistance from other accounts of the French exiles in Texas. The title of *Le Texas* is incorrectly given in Miss Ratchford's Preface.

Donald Joseph, who was teaching French at The University of Texas, made the translation and Miss Ratchford revised it editorially. Though acknowledging that she had introduced many changes, she says that the translation is basically his. She states that *L'Héroïne* had been "freely amended," but in fact it follows the original rather closely except for the omission of several overly rhetorical passages.

It must have been Miss Ratchford's preference of the literary to the historical that led her to place *The Heroine* before *Texas* in the book. She says *The Heroine* has a strong claim to be considered the first Texas novel, but the characters do not even reach Texas until three-fifths of the book has been narrated. Well over half is given to the courtship of Edmund and Ernestine in France, related in the delicate, genteel manner then in vogue. The author disclaims that his book is a novel; he says his facts are true, though he has changed the names of his hero and heroine. These "facts," as it appears in his Preface, have come from accounts of the exiles published in Paris, which he asserts a right to use. Besides letters by returned exiles in the newspapers, he mentions a work on Texas brought out by the publisher Ladvocat in 1819 and the book by Hartmann and Millard. Ladvocat's title was *Le Champ-d'Asile, tableau topographique et historique du Texas* and the author has been identified from his initials as Louis François L'Héretier.

Ladvocat was in the field before Hartmann and Millard (see their allusion on page 112), and his book went to a second edition in the year of publication. Hartmann and Millard promised to tell the love story of Edouard and Adrienne, said to be two of the exiles, but they decided not to because such a romantic tale might have caused doubts about the strict truth of their narration and detracted from their avowed purpose of making clear why the colony failed (see their Epilogue). The anonymous author of *L'Héroïne du Texas* picked up and exploited their lead; he was able to recognize literary opportunity when it beckoned. It was easy for him to construct a novel about young lovers and attach it to the adventures of Napoleonic exiles in a strange land. He was evidently not one of the colonists; if he had been, he would surely have said so in his Preface.

Comparison of the French and English texts indicates that not every departure from *L'Héroïne* can be considered an emendation. When Edmund keeps looking for Ernestine everywhere and at the same time tries to conceal his feelings from her brother, the French reads thus: "Je la cherchais sans cesse. J'aurais voulu commander à mes désires, à mes regards, à mon impatience" (p. 28). The English combines the sentences and implies an erroneous connection: "I sought her out ceaselessly, wishing to secure command of my desire, my glance, and my impatience" (pp. 44-45). The contrast and the conditional idea have been lost; it would have been better to keep the second sentence separate and render it something like this: "I tried vainly to master my emotions, glances, and impatience."

When Edmund is talking to Ernestine's brother about asking her parents for her hand, the brother assures him that they will hear his proposal. Then Edmund asks (p. 65), without the initial quotation marks, "Do you think they will listen to me with favor?" This is a rendition of "Croyez-vous qu'elle me sera favorable?”—“Do you think she will be favorable to me?" Edmund was wondering what Ernestine's attitude would be. Mr. Joseph might have misread "elles" for "elle," but he could hardly have mistaken the singular for the plural verb. The change must have been editorial.
Immediately afterward an impersonal *on* is translated as *they*, so that the pronoun seems to refer specifically to the opinion of Edmund held by Ernestine's parents instead of to that generally held (Testime qu'on a pour vous," p. 56).

"I am flying in the face of events that, in an hour perhaps, will decide my fate … (p. 67) is not a possible translation of "Je cours au-devant des événemens [sic], et dans une heure peut-être ma destinée va tre fixée …” (p. 59). Edmund means simply that he is getting ahead of events, wondering what will be the response to his proposal.

The reader will see at once that the word *later* in "her father, the later reigning supreme as General' (p. 77) should be *latter*, but he cannot tell that the passage is a garbling of “… il régnait, en général, une grande union parmi tous les colons" (p. 73). This should have been “… there existed, in general, a complete unity among the colonists."

Now and then the choice of words is unidiomatic or unhappy, as in "his remarks of me to them" (p. 34) or "a supernatural being you looked to my eyes" (p. 37). *About* should have been used instead of *of* and *appeared* instead of *looked*. On page 94 substitute *privation* for *poverty*; on page 96, *shelter* for *cabin*; on page 100, "in order not to endanger her life" for "if her health was not to be compromised."

Punctuation is not impeccable. American practice demands a comma after *charms* and a semicolon after *believe* in "equal to her charms of which she is neither vain nor proud" (p. 40) and "I spoke of it not badly, I believe, I saw my three traveling companions smile" (p. 44). No quotation marks should have been placed around the central paragraph on page 82; these are not the spoken words of anyone, but simply the narrator's apostrophe to the savior Indian. At the bottom of page 91 add quotation marks at the end of the paragraph purporting to be taken from the official's report.

In *The Heroine's* version of how the Indian saved the exiles who had eaten what they thought to be an edible plant, it is said that he pressed the juice of the antidote into "un coco pendu à sa ceinture" (p. 82). To conceal the author's mistake of implying that coconuts grew along the Trinity, Mr. Joseph or Miss Ratchford substituted the general term *vessel* (p. 82) for *coco*. In her Introduction Miss Ratchford suggests that the poisonous plant was probably poke greens. It is not described in *L'Héroïne*, but Hartmann and Millard say it resembled lettuce. According to their account, the antidote was another plant, which had to be boiled. In *L'Héroïne* the antidote is "fruits en grappe" (p. 82), rendered as "bunches of fruit" (p. 82). Miss Ratchford's reconstruction in her Introduction has features from both *The Heroine* and *Texas*. At any rate, the Indian behaved exactly as a noble savage should; he produced the antidote at once and brought about a cure, for, as all herb doctors know, near every harmful plant there grows a beneficial plant with the power of counteracting its effects. The settlers of East Texas did not learn the antidote for poke greens from the Indians; in-stead, they parboiled the greens and poured off the liquid as the first step in preparing them. (See James W. Byrd, "Creeping Ignorance on Poke Sallet," *The Sunny Slopes of Long Ago* [Dallas, 1966], pp. 157-63.) The plain narrative of a rank-and-file member of the so-called colony, translated by Jack Autrey Dabbs (in "Additional Notes on Champ d'Asile," S*outhwestern Historical Quarterly*, LIV [1950-51], 347-58), includes the poisoning incident but does not mention the timely arrival of the friendly Indian who knew just what to do.

The author of L'Héroïne speaks of hunting *cormorans* (p. 100) on Galveston Island for food. The translation has *cormorants* (p.93); pelicans would have been the nearest thing to cormorants in this locality, but the exiles would hardly have been eating them when game and fish were plentiful. Here the translator does not shield the author as he does in the occurrence of *coco*. Since *L'Héroïne* was not based on firsthand knowledge, when the author went beyond his written sources, he was likely to make mistakes.

In *Le Texas* the situation is different. It is sometimes difficult to find the right English word for an animal or plant mentioned by Hartmann and Millard, but they seem to have some real knowledge of what they were writing about. When they say that the colonists caught mostly *coad-fish* (p. 62, italicized) in the Trinity River, they could not have meant *codfish*. They were using this as an English word. Had they confused it with catfish, which to a Frenchman would sound very much like codfish? They had probably fished in other American rivers where catfish were caught. Mr. Joseph wisely carries over the word as *coadfish* in italics (p. 139) without trying to translate it.

Hartmann and Millard say (p. 125) that three kinds of snakes are numerous in Texas. *Le serpen [sic] à sonnettes* is the ordinary French designation for rattlesnake and presents no difficulties; *le congo* means the congo eel, sometimes called the *congo snake*, and *le mangeur d'oeufs* would be some kind of egg-eating snake, popularly know as a *chicken snake*. Mr. Joseph translates the last two names literally—*the congo* and *the egg-eater* (p. 176).

Mr. Joseph carries over into his translation some names of Indian tribes (italicized) just as they appear in *Le Texas* without providing equivalents more familiar to his readers. It would have been helpful to substitute the forms ordinarily used by writers in English, which he could have discovered by consulting the list of variant names in Hodge's Handbook of American Indians. These are equivalents, Hartmann and Millard's form on the left and Hodge's on the right:

| Alabamos   | Alibamu   |
| Camanches  | Comanche  |
| Chactas    | Choctaw   |
| Cochatis   | Koasati   |
| Dankhaves  | Tonkawa   |
| Karankavès | Karankawa |
| Panis      | Pawnee    |
| Tankards   | Tonkawa   |

Hodge does not add *s* to show the plural, though it is now general usage to do so. For many readers *Coushatta* would be more recognizable than *Koasati* because of the well-known Alabama-Coushatta reservation in East Texas. The Indian with the timely antidote was said to be a Coushatta.

Joseph and Ratchford's practice for the French *Naquidoches* is variable. In Texas the word occurs as *Naquidoche* (p. 132), *Nacogdoches* (p. 163), and *Naquidoches* (p. 177), all unitalicized. Hodge spells the name of the Indians without an *s*, but the town, named for the Indians, is *Nacogdoches*. Readers will be puzzled by the statement that the colonists had "made several plantings of Naquidoche, which did very well…” (p. 132). A phrase in the original—“de tabac" (p. 43)—was omitted in translation; what was planted was tobacco of the kind raised by the Nacogdoches Indians.

Place-names are very troublesome to a translator when his original deals with newly explored country and antedates the existence of a reliable map. All he can do is to correlate the names as he finds them with the later, accepted names and point out the difficulties whenever correlation is not possible. It is difficult to deal with geographical perplexities without some form of notes, and Joseph and Ratchford have none. They carry over into their text, without comment, the mysterious *rivière Barosso* of *Le Texas*, spelled *Barosso* on page 176 and *Baosso* on page 177. This is the Brazos. The geography is not very clear, but there is no other large river which “flows into the Gulf of Mexico near Galveston Bay" and which has a name sounding like the Spanish *Brazos*. L'Héretier uses the form *Brassas* in *Le Champ-d'Asile* (p. 64). The map which Ladvocat had made for the book shows a Barroso flowing into Galveston Bay east of the Trinity and joined to it above as if it were another mouth. (Ladvocat's map is reproduced on page 26.)

Ladvocat's map, said to be based on materials obtained from "one of the principal colonists," reflects the hazy conception which the French had of the region in 1819. Besides being incomplete and sketchy, it contains copyist's errors such as *Baralaria* for *Barataria* and *Careusin* for something like *Carasiu* (*Carcassiou* in *Le Texas*, p. 103). Nevertheless, with this inexact map it is possible to follow the overland journey of the colonists from Galveston to New Orleans. For the benefit of their readers Joseph and Ratchford should have used *Calcasieu* instead of *Carcassiou* and *Mermentau* instead of *Mermentas* (p. 164). They could have supplied modern equivalents for most of the other unfamiliar place-names.

The *Toya* mentioned in Texas (p. 177) is the *Attoyac*, despite the geographical inaccuracy of the sentence in which it occurs.

It would hardly be good practice to respell personal names that have been taken over into French, though the reader of Texas may be startled to see the name *Waskès* attributed to a Spanish colonel (p. 136). The colonel's wife is referred to later as *Madame Vasquez* (p. 170).

*Le Texas* was subjected to some editorial emendation, though not to so much as *L’Héroïne*. The apostrophe to women on page 78 of *Le Texas* was evidently thought to be too mawkish for inclusion, and so it was dropped without indication (p. 150). Nor is it indicated that details about General Rigaud's daughter and son were revised (p. 179) according to handwritten changes appearing in the copy of *Le Texas* (p. 130) which Joseph was using.

*Texas* contains fewer inexact or erroneous renderings than does *The Heroine*. At the top of page 108 there is a passage confused in sense and grammar: “… the refuge which you had been pleased to imagine would see the peaceful end of our days which has been but too long and stormy." The French (third page, un-numbered, of dedicatory epistle) is perfectly clear and easily translatable: “… the refuge where you had hoped that our days, too long tempestuous, would run their course in peace." Sometimes the tense is altered and sometimes a cognate in French produces a peculiar expression in English: “…et nous étions forces de convenir que le sexe le plus faible trouvait des forces qui quelque-fois nous abandonnaient" (p. 78) becomes “… and we are forced to admit that the so-called weaker sex possessed a strength which at times abandoned us" (p. 150). Change *are* to *were* and *abandoned* to *deserted*—and cancel the intrusive *so-called*. Mr. Joseph preferred to retain the French *eau-de-vie* instead of using the simple English word *brandy*, with the result that two typographical errors slipped by the editor, *eaude vin* (p. 150) *and eau de vin* (p. 153).

Errors of this kind puzzle the reader for a moment, but he can soon supply the correction. He has no means of correcting the kind of error which occurs on page 168 when two sentences beginning with dates become confused. The Scilly Islands were sighted on the 6th of May, not the 3rd; what happened on the 3rd has dropped out-a meeting with an English corvette (pp. 109-10). This is the only error of fact in *Texas* for which the translator or editor is responsible, and it is not very significant. More could be said about accuracy and expression in Joseph and Ratchford's *Texas*, but there is no reason for doing so.

Translators are always open to criticism, particularly in matters of exactness and idiom. The shortcomings of *The Story of Champ d’Asile* do not seriously impair the value or interest or the book for the general reader.

Wilson M. Hudson<br/>
Austin, Texas<br/>
July 20, 1969

<p align=center><a href="/texas/">↑ Table of Contents</a></p>
<p style="text-align:left;">
    <span style="float:right;">
        <a href="/texas/02-english-preface.html">English Edition Preface →</a>
    </span>
</p>
