---
layout: page
title: "2.6.9: A Century Under a Guimp"
---

Since we are dealing with the details of what was formerly the convent of the Petit Picpus, and have dared to open a window upon that secluded asylum, the reader will pardon us another little digression, foreign to the object of this book, but characteristic and useful, as it teaches us that the cloister itself has its original characters.

There was in the Little Convent a centenarian who came from the <span epub-type="stretchsummary">Abbey of Fontevrault.</span><span epub-type="stretchdetail"><br/>**D:** The huge medieval abbey complex at Fontevrault in Anjou, once housing four communities – of monks, repentant fallen women, lepers and nuns, ruled by the aristocratic women who predominated within the order – was the burial place of the Plantagenet kings Henry II (1133–89) and his sons Richard the Lionheart (1157–99) and John (1167–1216), and also of Henry’s wife Eleanor of Aquitaine (1124–1204).<br/>**R&M**: sometimes Fontevraud, an unusual abbey that was both a monastery and a nunnery. The Plantagenets supported the abbey, and several members of the family—Henry II, Eleanor of Aquitaine, and Richard the Lion-Hearted—are buried there. It was turned into a prison in 1804.<br/></span> Before the revolution she had even been in society. She talked much of <span epub-type="stretchsummary">M. de Miromesnil, keeper of the seals under Louis XVI.,</span><span epub-type="stretchdetail"><br/>**D:** Armand Thomas Hue (1723–96), Marquis de Miromesnil, Louis XVI’s minister of justice (1774–87).<br/> **R&M**: Armand-Thomas Hue de Miromesnil (1723–96), keeper of the seals for most of the reign of Louis XVI (1774–87).<br/></span> and of the lady of a President Duplat whom she had known very well. It was her pleasure and her vanity to bring forward these names on all occasions. She told wonders of the Abbey of Fontevrault, that it was like a city, and that there were streets within the convent.

She spoke with a Picardy accent which delighted the pupils. Every year she solemnly renewed her vows, and, at the moment of taking the oath, she would say to the priest: Monseigneur St. Francis gave it to Monseigneur St. Julian, Monseigneur St. Julian gave it to Monseigneur St. Eusebius, Monseigneur St. Eusebius gave it to Monseigneur St. Procopius, etc., etc.; <span epub-type="stretchsummary">so I give it to you, my father.</span><span epub-type="stretchdetail"><br/> D translates as "… and now, mon père, it’s my turn to take advantage of you." <br/>**D:** The nun’s quaintness of expression, using the verb *bailler*, ‘to give’ or ‘to pledge’, which has a chivalric resonance, becomes comic when she inadvertently uses the verb in a turn of phrase that has a decidedly colloquial ring to it, suggesting deception.<br/></span> And the pupils would laugh, not in their sleeves, but in their veils, joyous little stifled laughs which made the mothers frown.

At one time, the centenarian was telling stories. She said that <span epub-type="stretchsummary">*in her youth the Bernardines did not yield the precedence to the Mousquetaires.*</span><span epub-type="stretchdetail"><br/>**R&M:** A reference to the great age of libertinage in the eighteenth century; the implication is that Bernardine monks of aristocratic origin were as elegant and worldly as young officers of the musketeers. While the *abbé mondain* is a common literary and historical figure of the Enlightenment, it is unusual to see monks described in this way.<br/></span> It was a century which was speaking, but it was the eighteenth century. She told of the custom in Champagne and Burgundy before the revolution, of the four wines. When a great personage, a marshal of France, a prince, a duke or peer, passed through a city of Burgundy or Champagne, the corporation of the city waited on him, delivered an address, and presented him with four silver goblets in which were four different wines. Upon the first goblet he read this inscription: *Monkey wine*, upon the second: *lion wine*, upon the third: *sheep wine*, upon the fourth: *swine wine*. These four inscriptions expressed the four descending degrees of drunkenness: the first, that which enlivens; the second, that which irritates; the third, that which stupefies; finally the last, that which brutalises.

She had in a closet, under key, a mysterious object, which she cherished very highly. The rules of Fontevrault did not prohibit it. She would not show this object to anybody. She shut herself up, which her rules permitted, and hid herself whenever she wished to look at it. If she heard a step in the hall, she shut the closet as quick as she could with her old hands. As soon as anybody spoke to her about this, she was silent, although she was so fond of talking. The most curious were foiled by her silence, and the most persevering by her obstinacy. This also was a subject of comment for all who were idle or listless in the convent. What then could this thing be, so secret and so precious, which was the treasure of the centenarian? Doubtless, some sacred book, or some unique chaplet? or some proven relic? They lost themselves in conjecture. On the death of the poor old woman they ran to the closet sooner, perhaps, than was seemly, and opened it. The object of their curiosity was found under triple cloths, like a blessed patine. It was a Faenza plate, representing Loves in flight, pursued by apothecaries' boys, armed with enormous syringes. The pursuit is full of grimaces and comic postures. One of the charming little Loves is already spitted. He struggles, shakes his little wings, and still tries to fly away, but the lad capering about, laughs with a Satanic laughter. Moral:---love conquered by cholic. This plate, very curious, moreover, and which had the honour, perhaps, of <span epub-type="stretchsummary">giving an idea to Molière,</span><span epub-type="stretchdetail"><br/>**D:** In Molière’s play of 1669, *Monsieur de Pourceaugnac*, the hapless provincial nobleman of the title, who has come to Paris to claim an unwilling bride, is the victim of a comic conspiracy to thwart him, and he ends up at the end of Act I being pursued by an apothecary, doctors and dancing swordsmen, all brandishing syringes.<br/>**R&M:** It is not clear what play Hugo might be referring to, but farces about lovers’ misunderstandings are not unusual in Molière’s work.<br/></span> was still in existence in September, 1845; it was for sale in a second-hand store in the Boulevard Beaumarchais.

This good old woman would receive no visit from the outside world,
*because*, said she, *the locutory is too gloomy*.

## Footnotes

#### Donougher: A Century under the Veil

**Fontevrault:** The huge medieval abbey complex at Fontevrault in Anjou, once housing four communities – of monks, repentant fallen women, lepers and nuns, ruled by the aristocratic women who predominated within the order – was the burial place of the Plantagenet kings Henry II (1133–89) and his sons Richard the Lionheart (1157–99) and John (1167–1216), and also of Henry’s wife Eleanor of Aquitaine (1124–1204).

**Monsieur de Miromesnil:** Armand Thomas Hue (1723–96), Marquis de Miromesnil, Louis XVI’s minister of justice (1774–87).

**Monseigneur St François made his profession of vows to … and so on and so forth, and now, mon père, it’s my turn to take advantage of you:** The nun’s quaintness of expression, using the verb *bailler*, ‘to give’ or ‘to pledge’, which has a chivalric resonance, becomes comic when she inadvertently uses the verb in a turn of phrase that has a decidedly colloquial ring to it, suggesting deception.

**the distinction of inspiring Molière:** In Molière’s play of 1669, *Monsieur de Pourceaugnac*, the hapless provincial nobleman of the title, who has come to Paris to claim an unwilling bride, is the victim of a comic conspiracy to thwart him, and he ends up at the end of Act I being pursued by an apothecary, doctors and dancing swordsmen, all brandishing syringes.


#### Rose/Madden: A Century Under a Wimple

**the abbey of Fontevrault:** sometimes Fontevraud, an unusual abbey that was both a monastery and a nunnery. The Plantagenets supported the abbey, and several members of the family—Henry II, Eleanor of Aquitaine, and Richard the Lion-Hearted—are buried there. It was turned into a prison in 1804.

**Monsieur de Miromesnil:** Armand-Thomas Hue de Miromesnil (1723–96), keeper of the seals for most of the reign of Louis XVI (1774–87).

**the Bernardines were right up there with the Musketeers:** a reference to the great age of libertinage in the eighteenth century; the implication is that Bernardine monks of aristocratic origin were as elegant and worldly as young officers of the musketeers. While the *abbé mondain* is a common literary and historical figure of the Enlightenment, it is unusual to see monks described in this way.

**giving Molière an idea:** It is not clear what play Hugo might be referring to, but farces about lovers’ misunderstandings are not unusual in Molière’s work.
